# Bug 1863435 (small arrays)

- [x] Implement small storage via instance calls
- [x] Implement nursery allocation in Baseline
- [x] Implement nursery allocation in Ion
  - [x] Figure out the correct AliasSet for MWasmNewArrayObject
  - [x] Fix those finicky heisentests
- [x] Add stack map machinery for tracking live data pointers
- [x] Actually use the new stack map machinery (and make a test that reproduces the problem, obviously)
- [x] Actually use processor scaled access stuff for array elements (add MWasmLoadFieldScaled or something) (there may already be a bug for this)
- [x] Make the data pointer never null (always point inline in zero cases)
- [x] Don't zero memory for array.new_fixed
  - [x] Ion
  - [x] Baseline
- [x] Clean up prints
- [x] Clean up TODOs
- [x] Clean up commits (word wrap and such)
- [x] Get it passing try
- [ ] Allow immediates in branchMul32 (separate patch)
- [ ] Separate patch: apply trap reporting fix to structs
- [ ] Separate patch: make the "specific" versions of needFoo return their register type
- [ ] Separate patch: remove the malloc cache (?!)

---

- [x] --wasm-gc --gc-zeal=2 wasm/gc/ref-struct.js
- [x] --wasm-gc wasm/gc/signal-null-check.js
- [x] --wasm-gc --wasm-compiler=optimizing wasm/gc/signal-null-check.js
- [x] --wasm-gc --wasm-compiler=baseline wasm/gc/signal-null-check.js
- [x] --wasm-gc wasm/gc/trailers-gc-stress.js
- [x] --wasm-gc --wasm-compiler=optimizing wasm/gc/trailers-gc-stress.js
- [x] --wasm-gc --wasm-compiler=baseline wasm/gc/trailers-gc-stress.js
- [x] --wasm-compiler=baseline wasm/ref-types/stackmaps2.js
- [x] wasm/ref-types/stackmaps3.js
- [x] --wasm-compiler=optimizing wasm/ref-types/stackmaps3.js
- [x] --wasm-compiler=baseline wasm/ref-types/stackmaps3.js
- [x] --disable-wasm-huge-memory wasm/ref-types/stackmaps3.js
- [x] --wasm-test-serialization wasm/ref-types/stackmaps3.js
- [x] wasm/ref-types/stackmaps4-params-n-locals.js
- [x] --wasm-compiler=optimizing wasm/ref-types/stackmaps4-params-n-locals.js
- [x] --wasm-compiler=baseline wasm/ref-types/stackmaps4-params-n-locals.js
- [x] --disable-wasm-huge-memory wasm/ref-types/stackmaps4-params-n-locals.js
- [x] --wasm-test-serialization wasm/ref-types/stackmaps4-params-n-locals.js
- [x] --wasm-function-references --wasm-gc --wasm-tail-calls wasm/tail-calls/gc.js
- [x] --wasm-function-references --wasm-gc --wasm-tail-calls --wasm-test-serialization wasm/tail-calls/gc.js
- [x] --wasm-function-references --wasm-gc --wasm-tail-calls --wasm-compiler=ion wasm/tail-calls/gc.js
- [x] --wasm-function-references --wasm-gc --wasm-tail-calls --wasm-compiler=baseline wasm/tail-calls/gc.js

Lol this is just not done. I'm not even using the data pointer stuff in stack maps. Totally forgot.

Ok, redid stack maps to store an enum two bits at a time instead of basically doing two bitmaps end-to-end. Fewer loads that way, easier bit manipulation. Seems like a lot more tests are passing now.

Ugh data vs. data header is so confusing. Might want some accessor methods just for clarity.

---

I am back after, like, a month or something.

Last I left off, I think I had "successfully" implemented the inline allocation in baseline, along with the updated stack map machinery to track live pointers. However, I also never actually updated anything to _use_ those new features of stack maps. Which means there surely must be correctness bugs somewhere out there that I just have not found.

Iain and I discussed the possibility that this is due to alias sets in MIR. Now that I say that, it sounds insane because I don't think I even implemented this in Ion yet? So that could probably explain some things 😑

I do remember updating the AliasSet on something though...what was it...

Ok right. I have not yet implemented the nursery allocation part in either compiler - I've just implemented the small data storage via the instance call mechanism, since that's a prerequisite for correct behavior anyway.

I updated alias sets for MWasmNewStructObject. Ok. That's probably not gonna touch the new stuff anyway, so maybe that was just a "we should really have done this already" change.

Ok. So I think it's possible that we just can't actually trigger the data pointer weirdness until later. I'm just gonna forge ahead with Ion, I think, since that will hopefully trigger optimization insanity that breaks my assumptions and forces me to use the stack map machinery.

---

Just got a bit lost trying to figure out what the different stages of Ion should know about array sizes / storage bytes. Time to break this down.

The array size is not always statically known. That means that, for all instructions except array.new_fixed, we don't know whether we'll be using inline or out-of-line storage. This in turn implies that we'll need to JIT a check for that and then either do the nursery alloc or jump to out-of-line code.

However, array.new_fixed does exist. In that case we don't need to emit an IL/OOL check. However, we'll still need to know which path to emit code for.

So. From a codegen perspective we need to handle the following cases:

- Dynamic (IL/OOL depending)
  - Emit OOL instance call
  - JIT IL check, jump to instance call on fail
  - Attempt nursery alloc, fall back to OOL instance call on fail
- Static IL
  - Attempt nursery alloc, fall back to OOL instance call on fail
- Static OOL
  - Instance call always

The static cases will be patterned like structs. The dynamic one is new. In addition, the static cases should fail at compile time if the size is too big - maybe this is already happening.

All instance calls can reuse the existing signature, recalculating the storage size and deciding for themselves whether to be IL or OOL, despite this sometimes being statically known. I don't care enough about omitting that small recalculation to add a bunch of SASig nonsense.

NOTE TO SELF you're supposed to be allocating space for the entire array, not just the storage.

CURRENTLY: fixing up field initialization for the fixed size allocation path (and the zeroing loop afterward)

Hey! I'm passing a lot of tests! That's good!

---

Ok the Ion implementation is passing almost all the tests. And the ones that aren't passing are true heisenbugs; they pass if I add print statements or run in a debugger.

So for now I'm proceeding with baseline.

---

Baseline gud. Need to fix that bookkeeping bug. My branch is `array-alloc-the-sequel`.

---

After three hours on a call with Yury I think we have finally figured out that bookkeeping bug.

I am correctly calculating the storageBytes for arrays in my masm code. HOWEVER. That's not the actual size that should get allocated.

We have to contend with AllocKinds. Yury's specific example was triggering because of the following:

- We go to allocate an array. The nursery currently has about 144 bytes remaining.
- My masm code computes a total array size of 136. That fits in the nursery, so it goes ahead and allocates.
- Later we go to tenure that array. We compute the size of the allocation using the AllocKind system, which takes the value of 136 but then _rounds up_ to 152. This is because sizeof(JSObject_Slots12) == 120 but sizeof(JSObject_Slots16) == 152, and there is no intermediate size. So we are now expected to copy 152 bytes from the nursery...but that goes outside the bounds of the nursery.

So my masm code needs to handle our AllocKind selection logic. This sucks. The current way we do this in our C++ code starts with bytes, converts to a number of slots (in GetGCObjectKindForBytes), and then calls GetGCObjectKind, which indexes into a table of slot count -> AllocKind.

What I need instead is bytes -> bytes. I need to "round up". Doing precise AllocKind selection is actually a huge pain in the ass.

I wonder if I could just choose an enormous AllocKind for now? Or "round up" via some method that might use the nursery less efficiently but at least wouldn't break?

A "slot" is equal in size to a JS Value, and is 8 bytes on every platform. The maximum gap between two AllocKinds is 32 bytes = 4 slots. What if I round up to a multiple of 32?

Hey...4, 8, 12, and 16 are all valid AllocKinds. That's something.

Ryan suggests that table-driving it will probably be easy though, and gives us more efficient use of the nursery. So I think I'll go with that.

Ok. I have bytes. I need bytes again but rounded up. I need this driven by alloc kinds. I think I can just do with this a table by dividing the number of bytes by 8 and indexing into a table.

I can do this because I align the storage up to 8 (via gc::CellAlignBytes). I therefore never have to round anything. Divide by 8, index table, done.

After some symbolic address shenanigans it seems to be working again. Hooray!

---

Ok. It's all implemented. Time to do some ugly, nasty patch cleanup before proceeding with the remaining housekeeping.

First I think I need to just re-read these patches and see what they all do. Then I can hopefully reorder and squash a bunch of things.

- 43412cd007a5c Use better breakpoint code for arm64
  - Totally isolated. Put this patch first.
- 1eb0bcf96da3a Round allocations up to AllocKind
  - Squash with Ion commit, since that is the first one to do masm stuff.
- 8cb008bb1483d Enable GVN of array stuff and actually use the new stack map machinery
  - Contains gigantic hack for live data pointer stuff (to be resolved by proper scaled access).
  - Squash with Ion commit.
- eb6aa54d05acd Restore AliasSet::None for new arrays
  - Squash with Ion commit.
- cb404318264ae Implement inline array allocation in baseline
  - New base commit.
- ed4fc097b656c Remove overzealous AliasSet
  - Squash with parent (it will be reverted)
- 5e1e9a887f0db Fix trap reporting issue
  - Related to Ion implementation specifically.
  - Squash with parent.
- 4bf93a65428a9 Use word-size instructions when adding pointers
  - Squash with parent.
- 5188a2a06daad Broken ion implementation
  - Start of Ion implementation.
  - New base commit. (Reword.)
- 48efc3fe693ba Comment out prints
  - Squash with parent. (Will be cleaned up later.)
- dafc13da00b81 Fix bookkeeping bugs with array data
  - Just bugfixes. Squash with parent.
- dc9875f109391 Bug 1863435: Rework stack map storage, use enums
  - Improves stack map API.
  - Squash with parent.
- 94d6bf3d8ecb0 Bug 1863435: Fix stackmap accounting, clang-format
  - Squash with parent. Nothing interesting.
- 305c0f4863981 Bug 1863435: Get array inline data working
  - Add basics of inline storage.
  - Add new stack map machinery with bad API (and bugs).
  - Contains dumps.
  - Add data header stuff. (That early?)
  - Reword.

Zero conflicts! That was not so bad. Lucky me.

---

This stack map stuff has turned out to be really annoying. Let's figure out these test failures:

- [x] wasm/builtin-modules/oom-test.js
- [x] wasm/exceptions/bug-1791361.js
- [x] wasm/exceptions/bug-1751699.js

Those are clearly stackmap-related. I can audit other failures later.

Ok I just forgot to check for OOMs. Now I check for OOMs. Hooray.

---

Try time.

- [ ] wasm/simd/const-arm64-vixl-codegen.js
- [x] wasm/spec/gc/ref_eq.wast.js

The ref_eq problem was caused by incorrect zeroing logic for zero-size arrays. Fixed.

---

NOTE TO SELF: I am now working on branch phab-D196798. array-alloc-the-sequel is old news.

---

Where did the size go stupid?

Stack map: 8832
Scaled access: 8832
Baseline: 8832
Ion: 8832
Instance calls: 8832
Breakpoint: 8832

Ok...this is not working. Let's try that again but with static asserts this time.

Stack map: 8832
Scaled access: 8832
Baseline: 8832
Ion: 8832
Instance calls: 8760

There we go. So the ion patch changed the size of LinkData.

---

Figuring out this vixl nonsense.

```
Expected:
0x[0-9a-f]+ +[0-9a-f]{8} +sub     sp, sp, #0x.. \\(..\\)
0x[0-9a-f]+ +[0-9a-f]{8} +str     x23, \\[sp, #..\\]
0x[0-9a-f]+ +[0-9a-f]{8} +movi    v0\\.2d, #0x0
0x[0-9a-f]+ +[0-9a-f]{8} +b       #\\+0x8 \\(addr 0x.*\\)
0x[0-9a-f]+ +[0-9a-f]{8} +brk     #0x0

Actual:
0x2a6c49964090  d10043ff  sub     sp, sp, #0x10 (16)
0x2a6c49964094  f90007fe  str     x30, [sp, #8]
0x2a6c49964098  f90003fd  str     x29, [sp]
0x2a6c4996409c  910003fd  mov     x29, sp
0x2a6c499640a0  71004d5f  cmp     w10, #0x13 (19)
0x2a6c499640a4  540000e0  b.eq    #+0x1c (addr 0x2a6c499640c0)
0x2a6c499640a8  d4a00000  unimplemented (Exception)
0x2a6c499640ac  d503201f  nop
0x2a6c499640b0  d10043ff  sub     sp, sp, #0x10 (16)
0x2a6c499640b4  f90007fe  str     x30, [sp, #8]
0x2a6c499640b8  f90003fd  str     x29, [sp]
0x2a6c499640bc  910003fd  mov     x29, sp
0x2a6c499640c0  910003fc  mov     x28, sp
0x2a6c499640c4  d2800a10  mov     x16, #0x50
0x2a6c499640c8  f2a00010  movk    x16, #0x0, lsl #16
0x2a6c499640cc  cb3063e8  sub     x8, sp, x16
0x2a6c499640d0  f9401ef0  ldr     x16, [x23, #56]
0x2a6c499640d4  eb08021f  cmp     x16, x8
0x2a6c499640d8  54000043  b.lo    #+0x8 (addr 0x2a6c499640e0)
0x2a6c499640dc  d4a00000  unimplemented (Exception)
0x2a6c499640e0  d10143ff  sub     sp, sp, #0x50 (80)
0x2a6c499640e4  f90027f7  str     x23, [sp, #72]
0x2a6c499640e8  6f00e400  movi    v0.2d, #0x0
0x2a6c499640ec  14000002  b       #+0x8 (addr 0x2a6c499640f4)
0x2a6c499640f0  d43e0000  brk     #0xf000
0x2a6c499640f4  910143ff  add     sp, sp, #0x50 (80)
0x2a6c499640f8  f94003fd  ldr     x29, [sp]
0x2a6c499640fc  f94007fe  ldr     x30, [sp, #8]
0x2a6c49964100  910043ff  add     sp, sp, #0x10 (16)
0x2a6c49964104  910003fc  mov     x28, sp
0x2a6c49964108  d65f03c0  ret
```

It's the breakpoint code lol

---

Compacting GC bug.

We are crashing during a compacting GC when attempting to update an array data pointer on the stack. The pointer points at

---

Ok fixed the final weird crash too. It was a bookkeeping error where I was zeroing 40 more bytes of memory than I should. This only manifests as a crash if you fill the nursery up to <40 bytes remaining, resulting in a bad access.

This short paragraph does not do justice to the week I spent just reproducing the bug in a way I could debug.

Now on phab-D196798_1.

---

Addressing feedback. Next steps: fix conflicts, then go back and address Ryan's outstanding comments and jonco's thing about typed arrays (groan).

---

Now on phab-D196798_2. It's so, so close to done, but after rebasing onto central, we have some Windows-specific debugger-specific failures. Very good. Love it.

At least I have a chance to give the RAD debugger another try, I guess.

---

Wow, what a stupid issue.

So, we used to use zero-length arrays for inline data, so that we could address memory at the end of the class. Like so:

```
alignas(8) uint8_t inlineData_[0];
```

But this is UB in C++. jonco therefore suggested that I use the TrailingArray mixin class, which provides UB-free methods for doing similar things. For example:

```cpp
T* offsetToPointer(Offset offset) {
  uintptr_t base = reinterpret_cast<uintptr_t>(this);
  return reinterpret_cast<T*>(base + offset);
}
```

This seems fine. You just add a `size_t` to `this`.

EXCEPT. MULTIPLE INHERITANCE.

When you use this in a multiple inheritance situation, the value of `this` is actually completely undefined. If you do `WasmArrayObject : WasmGCObject, TrailingArray`, then `this` in `TrailingArray` methods _might_ equal `this` in `WasmArrayObject` methods. Or it might not.

In my case, it worked fine on Mac and Linux but not on Windows. MSVC just puts the two classes in a different order, resulting in `this` being offset by the size of `WasmGCObject`, and leading me to compute positions outside the actual array.

Iain came up with a terrible way of "fixing" it using static_cast, but man. This sucks. It's bad. I hate it. C++ is bad.

---

One last thing with this patch: Ryan's string builtins.

There's one failing test related to Ryan's new string implementation. It's in code that converts between JS strings and wasm GC arrays. No surprise then that something got screwed up here.

In particular, what seems to be happening is that a string is filling up with nursery poison instead of the actual string data we're looking for. Ryan and I looked at it and we think that it is occurring because an inline-storage array is moving to the tenured heap after we grab its data pointer. This is suck.

But it makes sense. If you look at `Instance::stringFromWTF16Array`, you see that we pass an array data pointer to `NewStringCopyN<CanGC>`. That `CanGC` is the problem. GC-ing will cause the array to move but won't cause the data pointer to update. And unfortunately we can't solve this by just pointing at the array object; the array object moves too.

We can just turn off GC for this call, I guess. Not sure what other choice we have. I'm going to implement that and then get Ryan's opinion.

---

I shipped this today :)

That is by far the most significant chunk of work I've yet done at Mozilla. It feels really good to have brought this through to completion!
