# Bug 1885363 (merge ModuleEnvironment and Metadata)

So ModuleEnvironment and Metadata have grown to be almost identical. ModuleEnvironment is the module-specific version of the info, designed to be used on module creation, i.e. the ahead-of-time compile. Metadata on the other hand is the instance-specific data. These have gravitated toward each other strongly as more wasm features have blurred the line between ahead-of-time and runtime, and if we want to do speculative optimizations, we need to be compiling at runtime anyway, so the module/instance distinction is somewhat moot. The two types can be collapsed to one.

In fact, Ryan said that the only information missing on Metadata is the vector of `FuncDesc`s used for compiling functions. I need to verify this since I also don't see data segments.

Present in both:

- Types (MutableTypeContext vs. SharedTypeContext)
- Memories (MemoryDescVector)
- Globals (GlobalDescVector)
- Tables (TableDescVector)
- Tags (TagDescVector)

Present only on ModuleEnvironment:

- Data segments (DataSegmentEnvVector) (this must be available to instances somehow!)

Present only on Metadata:

- Filename / sourceMapURL (presumably for debugging, where does it come from?)

Relevant places for copying from one to the other:

- ModuleGenerator::finishMetadata

Questions:

- If a ModuleGenerator creates a Metadata in the process of creating a wasm module, and seemingly only does so when compiling for baseline, how does it compile "tier 2" (presumably Ion) functions?
- 