# GC spec tests (bug 1784268)

[ ] Update to absolutely latest commit of the GC repo

Forgot to start writing this until today! I have managed to get the GC spec tests importing and generating some (pretty broken) JS. This took a couple days of tearing my hair out over the wasm-tools parser and its weird-ass design.

I got this blog post out of it: https://bvisness.me/you-cant/

Unfortunately a lot of tests don't work because they depend on i31ref in some fashion. I think we need to get that landed before I do any more work on this.

Rebasing onto Ryan's patches now (phab-D177814). We'll see how many things pass after this.

The rebase is sad and bad. Gotta see if I can pull in my patches for vendoring indexmap.

Too many conflicts. Gonna just wait until i31 stuff has landed.

Ok, i31 stuff has landed and my stuff rebases with no issue. Now working through some tests.

Starting with the i31-specific tests, we find that it still fails to compile with "unrecognized opcode". This threw me for a bit but it's actually because we apparently didn't update the InitExpr interpreter - meaning any use of i31s in globals or element segments is currently not allowed. Should be relatively easy to fix.

I have it interpreting i31.new now. There was some confusion over whether it returns a nullable type or not, but it seems very obvious that it should return (ref i31) and not (ref null i31) as the Google doc implies. The GitHub repo and spec tests clearly indicate (ref i31), so this is certainly just a typo.

With that, i31.wast.js is validating, but unfortunately I think we need to improve the spec test generator. It's producing the following gem of a line:

```cpp
// ./test/core/gc/i31.wast:28
assert_return(() => invoke($0, `new`, [1]), [value('i31ref', {})]);
```

It clearly should be `value('i31ref', 1)`. The error message indicates as much: "can only pass a 31-bit number to an i31ref". I suspect we just always generate objects for references, since up to this point it's always been functions, structs, arrays, or extern.

The actual line from i31.wast is:

```
(assert_return (invoke "new" (i32.const 1)) (ref.i31))
```

This is one of those new assertions that's supposed to merely validate the type, not the value. I think this is new as of the GC spec tests, which unfortunately means I have the pleasure of updating both the spec test generator and the test harness.

Oh right, the spec test generator contains the following:

```rs
// TODO: I can 100% guarantee you that these are extremely wrong.
```

Past me was right.

Ok, things seem to be hooked up now to check if a particular ref result is a subtype of some ref type. Most of the actual machinery was already in place thanks to Ryan adding i31's to the WebAssembly.Global constructor. Just had to add a new testing function, a new class in the harness (instanceof 🤮), and tweak the test generator.

Weirdly, now, we're not trapping when accessing a null i31. I wonder if it's returning 0?

Yeah, we are. Bad times. But, I think this is just a failure to check for the i31 tag bit. That should be how we distinguish a null from a zero, right?

It's past 6pm now so I think I'll just get Ryan's help on that tomorrow. Gonna commit the test case stuff I changed today, if not the actual fixes?


Implementing it into baseline was easy. Implementing in Ion will probably be easy once I actually know where to put the code, but there are so many different places...I mean, the whole Ion chain goes:

- WasmIonCompiler::EmitI31Get
- FunctionCompiler::i31Get
- MWasmI31RefGet
- LIRGenerator::visitI31RefGet
- CodeGenerator::visitWasmI31RefGet
- masm stuff

We have a FunctionCompiler::trapIfZero that only works with I32 nodes (anyref is a pointer), we have MWasmTrapIfNull which probably does what I want but I don't know how to use, I could implement it in codegen...I dunno man, it's crazy. Doing it at in a high-level MIR thing makes the most sense but I just don't actually know how.

Ok it was very easy. Done.

Ok this is annoying. I implemented the new harness things wrong, apparently. It's supposed to basically do a cast to the desired type, so that it can handle e.g. anyref -> structref too. This is annoying mainly because it means I'll have to make wasm modules to do the ref.test or ref.cast for me >:(

But fine. Not that hard. The harness was harder to figure out than the actual wasm implementation.

Let's catalogue all the errors now:

[ ] indirect call signature mismatch
[x] vector out of bounds in serialization or something (patch might already exist for this one)
[ ] expected an unlinkable module
[ ] got "[i32:0]", expected "[i32:2]" (ref_test.wast.js)
[ ] argument is not a wasm value (ref_null.wast.js)
[ ] globals are of different type (local_init.wast.js)
[ ] imported global type mismatch (i31.wast.js)
[ ] unrecognized opcode: fb f (array_fill.wast.js)
[ ] unreachable executed (br_on_cast_fail.wast.js)

That's a few. Let's go back to i31; that's probably another harness issue.

Ok, this is subtle. It seems that an imported global's type must match _exactly_ right now - for example, you can't pass a global of type (ref i31) to an imported global of type `anyref`. Or maybe that's not exactly what's going on? I need to confirm how we turn wasm function returns into globals in this harness.

The conversion to globals seems to happen in a testing function, naturally. After a long chain of events, I see the creation of a global happens in ToJSValue_lossless. This...this might not actually be that helpful. Let me see where the error message comes from about "imported global type mismatch" - maybe it just needs to be updated to handle subtypes.

Yeah, it does `obj->type() != global.type()`. Maybe wrong. Need to see if the JS API specifies how subtypes work, but I'd wager subtypes are supposed to work here.

Updating it to do a subtype check works. Good?

Here begins a general todo list:

- [ ] Add some tests for exporting and importing globals of various subtypes

Ryan says that mutability affects whether we should be able to do this stuff with globals. Very spooky. Looks like we already have code that handles this though, maybe? Still definitely need tests.

I created bug 1848006 for the global subtyping issue: https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/show_bug.cgi?id=1848006

You know, at this point, maybe I should submit the spec tests as their own thing, just so I have it all on Phabricator and can refer to it later. We'll be fixing up the issues one at a time before actually landing the spec tests.

I also should get ref.host working first...yeah, that's what I'll do next.

For now, my i31 fixes are on a branch called i31-spec-tests.

Ok, I got ref.host implemented in wasm-tools. I'm now getting some truly hilarious results in the extern tests. When I expect `hostref(1)`, the console prints "expected [ref:3]". When I expect `hostref(5)` (0b0101), I get "expected [ref:b]" (0b1011). I'm getting i31'd.

And sure enough, when I expect `hostref(Math.pow(2, 31))` (which doesn't fit in an i31), it falls back to a pointer representation. None of this helps me but it is very funny.

What I somehow need to do is change the equality check to handle these internalized values, somehow. The externref stuff seems to store raw numbers; obviously internalized host values are stored differently but somehow I need to work past that difference. I can do testing functions and stuff if I have to, but it's not 100% clear what is actually required.

So let's see what's actually happening here. I've seen already that the string representations of ref values are just the raw pointer value stored by the wasm::AnyRef, and this includes the i31 packed representation. Here's the test and the message I'm getting:

```js
assert_return(() => invoke($0, `internalize`, [externref(1)]), [value('anyref', hostref(1))]);
// got "[ref:8cfad102130]", expected "[ref:3]"
```

The former is a pointer, the latter is an i31. You know, maybe this means my little internalizing scheme based on JS coercion isn't the way to go. Do I actually want to be producing i31refs?

The way we do externrefs in the harness is actually by creating an object wrapping the number. We take a number `n` and create `{ [Symbol("externref")]: n }`, and then hand that off to wasm. Internalizing this seems to just stuff the pointer to that JS value into the wasm::AnyRef. The test is then asking us to compare it against a (ref.host 1), which my code is currently just turning into an i31ref. Obviously these will not be comparable.

So really when comparing externref and hostref I think we need to extract the numeric value contained within. The anyref coercion does seem to be lossless (using i31 behind the scenes or boxing) so maybe I can just make an `extracto` function that wrangles the number back out again.

Ah, this is why we store a map of all externrefs in our harness! We want all calls to `externref(n)` to return the exact same JS object, so that when we compare pointer values internally, we get the match. We might not want to do that; it's weird to rely on that extra "canonicalization" step. We'd arguably want to extract and compare the numeric values. However, this also doesn't really capture the internalized / externalized distinction.

This test takes the JS number 1, converts it to externref, internalizes it to anyref, and then asserts that it's an internalized anyref with the numeric value 1. What is the best way of performing that assert? Ideally we wouldn't produce a _new_ value to compare against, we'd actually dig into the wasm data and see if it contains the right value. However, this arguably means just...extracting a JS number out of it. We could do so using testing functions, but this seems like it would be fragile and error-prone. We could do so using wasm functions to undo the boxing, but this perhaps doesn't test the multiple representations.

However, if boxing and unboxing these values is consistent the whole way through, I think we're fine. So I think I'm gonna just write some code that unpacks the numeric values from externrefs and anyrefs and change the values the harness compares for equality.

Ick, this is weird and difficult. If I pass an externref as a parameter, but later assert that it should be a hostref, I need to actually unpack an externref - but how am I supposed to know that the original param was an externref?

The global comparison thing could maybe just inspect the WebAssembly global values to see what they are. Like maybe I can check for my externsym there? Worth a shot.

Aha!

```
[object WebAssembly.Global] [object Object] 1   // externref
[object WebAssembly.Global] 1 undefined         // hostref
```

This does work. This is good. I can just do some wrapperoni nonsense to get the numbers back out. Although...they won't be WebAssembly globals any more after I extra the numbers. Argh! I'm just gonna make a new wrapper class and dodge all this global nonsense.

Ok, that works when ref.host is a result. But now I need to handle ref.host as an input, getting converted to externref. This is going to immediately run afoul of our usual methods for checking against externref, since this externref is not getting created via our harness and getting our special symbol. How the heck am I going to handle this? Can I even extract the numeric value from the externref in general? I don't see how I would. Unless the global value is just...the number. Which it might be...

Oh hell yeah. Internalized-then-externalized hostref first, then harness-created externref second:

```
[object WebAssembly.Global] 2 undefined
[object WebAssembly.Global] [object Object] 2
```

So the number 2 does just pop back out of the global even though it's been externalized. This can work. What I'm thinking I can do is convert all externref result checks to extract the numeric value from the actual result, either by extracting from externsym or just using the global value as-is. Then we just compare JS numbers. EZ?

That worked! But unfortunately it messed with some prior patch. Need to investigate that.

Ooh, maybe these are just tests that we were deleting before that we can actually run now! Uh, or maybe not. Or something? What is going on? The test is in the function-references proposal, but it's complaining that gc types are not enabled. Why...

Oh...because my ref.host stuff tries to compile a wasm module that uses GC stuff. Yay, huzzah. Gonna guard that out and try again.

The tests work now! :D I can get rid of the patch.

It seems that all the test failures are in gc-land now. This is good, because it means my harness changes are good on their own.

Gonna have to spend some time working through feedback on the wasm-tools stuff. Probably won't document it all here, but I can't let that PR stagnate (especially since others are wanting the same things I implemented).

---

The work has now been rebased onto my global import/export fixes (bug 1848006).

---

Time to do a proper audit of these test failures, before I go too far into other stuff.

[6] failed to read initializer operation
[7] unrecognized opcode: fb f (array.fill)
[6] unrecognized opcode: fb 20 (i31.new)
[6] argument is not wasm value
[6] Assertion failed: got "[i32:0]", expected "[i32:2]"
[7] indirect call signature mismatch
[6] expected an unlinkable module

Where are the tests for array.init_data and array.init_elem? There are tests in the GC repo.

Ok, I think the issue was likely just that we were on an old commit of the GC repo. I forgot there was a lock file. But I should still confirm later.

Anyway, I'm now assembly a big branch that contains all the in-flight GC stuff to run spec tests on. Branches to merge together:

bug1848006 (global imports)
bug1850028-ryan (ryan's version of indirect call subtyping) (now landed)
bug1851569 (i31 cast fixes)
bug1851864 (new array instructions)
bug1853189 (i31, added after subsequent confusion)
bug1853205 (rename i31.new to ref.i31)

These will all be merged into gc-spec-tests-all and then the spec tests patch (bug1784268) applied separately on top.

New audit:

[ ] global.get index out of range (gc/global.wast.js)
[ ] unrecognized opcode fb 20 (wait am I missing a patch? this is just i31.new)

Yes, good thing I did this devlog. I have a branch called i31-spec-tests. It's a mess but the work is there. Time to pull that into its own bug. (bug1853189)

The two commits that actually fix up i31 support are:

44affc9160c532e9ee7128e8072820cb51bdc64a
3eb6ad45adbb82c9a8dc054d681af98dd4e51df8

Something is off here. There's a big new implementation of ValidateInitExpr in WasmInitExpr.cpp. But I don't see the corresponding deletion of the old one. I remember moving this code around, but I should see both sides of the diff.

Ok, wasm::DecodeConstantExpression is the old impl, ValidateInitExpr is the new one. I think. I need to spelunk in searchfox.

Aha, ValidateInitExpr moved from WasmValidate.cpp to WasmInitExpr.cpp and got renamed to DecodeConstantExpression. See https://hg.mozilla.org/mozilla-central/rev/ac6ac22ca5299f8d2d4a29201f55f5975a51244e. So this now makes sense; I need to take the i31 modification that was originally applied to ValidateInitExpr and apply it to DecodeConstantExpression.

Ok, now that that's patched up, I can merge that back in and run _another_ audit.

[x] exit code -11 (array.wast.js) (serialization again yay)
[ ] global.get index out of range (global.wast.js)
  - bad test, see https://github.com/WebAssembly/gc/issues/433
[x] argument is not wasm value (ref_null.wast.js)
[ ] indirect call signature mismatch (type-equivalence.wast.js)
  - fun times for ryan
[x] expected an unlinkable module (type-rec.wast.js)
  - fixed by function subtype fix or somethinggit
[ ] expected trap (type-subtyping.wast.js) (related to call_indirect) (is the test wrong?)
  - partially fixed
  - more fun times for ryan

More hashes:

- Spec test small fixes: a813bb3f707ec8f525d213eabb3ab77fc23082ae
- Latest spec tests themselves: c8b2466d627c4c6edd9261ad9d5d1bbf86cdb125
- (LANDED) wasm-tools, new encoding, and i31 rename: D188356
- new array instructions: bug1851864
- final types flag: D188642
- type section serialization: D188636
- load32 fix: D188643
- br_on_cast validation: D188645

Modification to the spec test patch: 9a0012a6a45c1
More small fixes to roll up: 54ade5ae36976
