# Bug 1850028 (subtype matching on call_indirect)

[ ] Suppress prologue codegen for functions without super types
[x] Re-enable immediate stuff somehow
[ ] Avoid performance regression from immediate optimization (currently all call_indirects will go through the slow path until final types are enabled)
[ ] Split breakpoint stuff into a separate patch

I need my stream of consciousness even at all hands!

I am trying to add a supertype vector check on call_indirect. I finally found the actual runtime check (it's in GenerateFunctionPrologue, which I once knew but then forgot). As expected, it's only doing an equality check.

We can keep the equality check as the dramatically more likely fast path. This seems like a situation where branch prediction is our friend and will result in avoiding the supertype vector load and test most of the time, and my hunch is that it's better than loading the supertype vector all the time.

The question is, what data do I even have access to?

The actual data being loaded and compared is a wasm::TypeDef*. This is the first field on TypeDefInstanceData. The SuperTypeVector is the second field. The TypeDef also contains a pointer to the SuperTypeVector but also has the subTypingDepth.

I don't think I need the subTypingDepth at runtime; I need to know the subTypingDepth at compile time so that the code can be generated to look up the correct index. That means I'll need to load a TypeDef

NOTES:

- When generating a prologue:
  - General case: load actual supertype vector and check at expected's subtyping depth
  - Special case: if the actual type has no parents, strict equality is sufficient
- On call_indirect:
  - Put the expected TypeDef* in the register as before

Prologue pseudocode for GLOBAL ONLY:

Load actual TypeDef*
Branch if actual TypeDef* == expected TypeDef* -> success
if actual has parent types:
  Load actual SuperTypeVector*
  Load expected subTypingDepth
  Branch if actual SuperTypeVector* contains expected -> success
Trap

---

Renaming time:

[x] SuperTypeVector -> STV (most places)
[x] offsetOfTypeDefInVector -> offsetOfSTVInVector (or some such)

---

Back to the real work. This is still very confusing but I will get through it.

Got some kind of implementation done. The test type-subtyping.wast.js seems to be a good test case.

FIX A BUG HELP

expected (x10): 0x00000001042d0958
was jumping to 3263658AC014
               3263658AC0A4

FIX ANOTHER BUG

call_indirect to function 0 -> load actual @ 130
call_indirect to function 1 -> load actual @ 178

This seems fine. But why are different offsets resolving to the same type def?

Oh no...canonicalizing?

Never mind, --wasm-final-types wasn't on.

---

Ok, let's get immediate types working again. We've added a thing that clears the immediate whenever you add a super type definition, but when we actually perform a call_indirect, we are seemingly still expecting an immediate.

Could this be a canonicalization issue? The types are in different rec groups, but if we messed this up, we might end up with just a single TypeDef or a single FuncType, perhaps. Or maybe canonicalization just recomputes the immediate stuff.

Why does it say there are three rec groups here? Oh, I guess the function implicitly has a type, which would get its own recursion group.

I would really hope this doesn't get canonicalized. The types are in different recursion groups and indeed the types themselves are different. One has no super types, the other does. One returns `(ref null func)`, the other returns `(ref null $$t1)`.

While explaining my debugging to Ryan yesterday, I found a bug. Now that recursion groups and non-final types are in the language, we need to restrict the immediate optimization to the following:

- Final types only
- With no parent type
- In a recursion group of size 1

If non-final types are allowed, then the type can have subtypes which we would need to put through the full subtype pass. If the type has a parent type, the same reason applies. And finally, types in recursion groups of size > 1 may not be considered equivalent even if they are structurally equivalent in every respect.

---

Debugging a serialization issue now. This is a successful run:

group becomes canonical: 103710c00
  - in CompileBuffer/DecodeTypeSection
canonical group 103710c00 used instead of 103711000:
  - in CompileBuffer/DecodeTypeSection
canonical group 103710c00 used instead of 103711000:
  - in CompileBuffer/DecodeTypeSection
canonical group 103710c00 used instead of 103711000:
  - in CompileBuffer/DecodeTypeSection

This makes sense. There are four recursion groups being processed across two modules. All canonicalize to the same thing.

I'm not sure why the pointer is the same for the non-canonical rec group three times in a row.

Now a run with the serialization roundtrip:

group becomes canonical: 104118000
  - in CompileBuffer/DecodeTypeSection
canonical group 104118000 used instead of 104110c00:
  - in CompileBuffer/DecodeTypeSection
canonical group 104118000 used instead of 104111000:
  - in Module::deserialize
group becomes canonical: 104111000
  - in Module::deserialize

This is already clearly wrong. All of them should have canonicalized to the same thing.

I'm skeptical of the numbers I'm printing to identify these things. Why are they the same in the first case?
