# Bug 1884572 (slow LZ4 encoding)

Actually kind of an interesting case. It is just one chunky wasm function, that's it. Makes me wonder if we're even tiering, actually.

This really is a very simple case. It seems to be very straightforward wasm, without even any fancy control flow. It's kinda just crunching. In fact, it's surprising then that we'd have an appreciable performance difference here.

I'm not really sure how to approach the performance of a program like this...but this is probably as good a case as any to learn on.

Well, converting arbitrary wasm/js stuff for the browser to the shell is asinine and annoying, but I got it done and got it through iongraph. So that's nice. Hopefully. I know that it's wasm function 2 in the profiler; thankfully the iongraph function numbers seem to correspond to wasm function numbers! As such, the following command now works great:

```
iongraph js -f 2 -- lz4-block-codec-wasm.js
```

Now - this is indeed a chunky function and will take me a while to pick through. I'm not sure I'll actually learn anything interesting, but I guess we'll see. It doesn't even shrink much in optimizing - I'd wager that this was already compiled from C++ with decent optimizations.

Huh - it's actually handwritten wasm: https://github.com/gorhill/lz4-wasm/blob/master/src/lz4-block-codec.wat

That is, it's handwritten wasm that's been plumbed through wasm-opt. That's fine, I guess. At least I have annotated wasm to look at. And I guess this explains the use of local.tee.
