# Bug 1863609 (GVN of wasm casts)

We are not doing GVN! We should do GVN!

Strangely, it does seem like we've done some legwork to enable this. But the iongraph clearly indicates that redundant checks are happening. Not sure why.

Ok, it was just an AliasSet thing. Added that, and now it seems like GVN happens just fine. So that's convenient, easy win - but, we've discovered a new thing in the process.

We don't seem to be eliminating redundant MTest nodes at all. This seems like low-hanging fruit, especially since it could potentially remove large amounts of dead code.

---

I'm actually making some pretty good progress toward building this optimization, I think. But you can't just remove an MTest instruction from the end of a block...that obviously doesn't work, you need to actually prune the graph too, or maybe just mark things as dead.

So, how do we tell if we're dead? I think it depends on whichever path we're on from the dominating test instruction. Although, control flow can probably rejoin in some unpleasant ways, so maybe we can be on both paths...

I think maybe the "both paths" thing doesn't matter based on the way you traverse the graph? Although...in principle you could have a situation like:

```
| block 0 |
| test X  |

  |     |
  v     v

| block 1 |
| test X  |

  |     |
  v     v
```

In which case you are in fact on both paths.

But I guess you can think of it this way - if you're on the test = 0 path, you can mark your test = 0 path as dead. Independently, if you're on the test = 1 path, you can mark your test = 1 path as dead.

Er, wait. No. If you are NOT on the test = 0 path, you can mark your test = 0 path as dead. If you are NOT on the test = 1 path, you can mark your test = 1 path as dead. So in the example above, you might just not mark the second test as redundant. That might be ok because this is pretty niche. Certainly you could have a more complex control flow rejoin situation, but I would imagine that it's fine to keep the "redundant" test in that case, since you can't really prune either of your control paths anyway. Right?

So I'm wondering if maybe you don't want to do a preorder traversal here. Or rather, maybe you want to do a more depth-first preorder traversal.

The term "dominator" has more meaning than I realized. Iain pointed out that what I actually want is to find a predecessor test, and then see if I am dominated by either of that test's immediate successors. If so, then we are only reachable along that path and we can therefore turn this test/branch into a goto (and maybe more).

---

This turned out to be really easy!

We just had to add a new type of `MTest::foldsTo`. That's all. The GVN logic already handles tests turning into gotos, and all the dominator information is already there. No need to track anything in addition to what we already had.

Here's hoping it makes a difference for perf!
