# STAGE nonsense (bug 1843399)

Ryan has a patch that fixed a recent issue with wasm command-line flags, which has led to tests being inadvertently skipped. Now it turns out we actually had test failures emerge during the few days of skipped tests, and I need to fix them.

Ok it was a simple fix, just needed to put `sub` around some types. THIS IS VERY STUPID TEXT SYNTAX and I want to fix it.

The binary encoding for types and subtypes breaks down like so:

no annotations: final type with no parents
0x4e vec(type indices): final type with parent types
0x50 vec(type indices): open type with parent types

The missing case here is "open type with no parents", which is the source of our suffering today.

It seems clear to me that we have two independent pieces of information here which are being combined awkwardly. Whether the type is extensible is completely separate from whether the type has parents. While it is relatively natural to encode it by the current encoding, it is very awkward in the text format.

I propose two separate things which can be added to any `type` declaration: an `open` keyword and a `(sub <typeidx>...)` list.

(type $s1 (struct))                             ;; final with no parents
(type $s2 open (struct))                        ;; open with no parents
(type $s3 (sub $s2) (struct (field i32)))       ;; final with one parent
(type $s4 open (sub $s2) (struct (field i32))) `;; open with one parent

(type $s5 (sub $s2 $s4) (struct i32 i32)) ;; potential future: multiple base types

anyway this bug is fixed already bye
